Yes, what I have been saying is that in our case, special collections don't include the rare books.
The rare books will go to Tolbiac with all the books.
They will be kept in a special place
for rare books, just as they are kept here.
But all of them will be in Tolbiac.
And here you'll find manuscripts.
The manuscripts will stay here?
Yes, of course.
All the manuscripts, the engravings and photos, maps, music scores,
the, how do you say, medals, money, and antics.
And we gather here all the collections relating to performing arts too.
We'll open a very great department for performing arts.
Really?
Yes.
Already we have many collections about them, but they are not here, they are spread
among different places.
May I ask, what is the difference between special collections and rare books?
In the United States, special collections are rare books.
Are they different here?
Are they different?
Well, it was not a French word, if you want.
And when we had to define
to find a name for all the collection which will remain here.
We thought to it and finally we agreed to give the name of special collections because this collection here, which will remain in Richelieu, include manuscripts.
include music scores, include maps, and in many Anglo-Saxon libraries, under the word special collections, you find rare books, yes, but you find two manuscripts, maps, and music scores.
Here, what is exceptional, and more scarce in, generally, in the national libraries, are two departments.
One is our prints,
engravings and photo departments because in many countries you find it in museums and not in libraries.
And the second one is the ones for the medals, coins and antics.
I don't know, you say antics or antics?
Antics, yes.
Antics.
So, but both of them, the engravings
and the coins and medals department are two of the most ancient departments of our library.
They were founded in 1720 and at that time, before 1720, all the things, the books, the two objects belonging to the king
were gathered together and and there was there were not several departments and for the first time for the first time in 1720 the library all the collections the royal collections were organized in five departments one of course one was the manuscripts department and there were second ones
for what we call genealogies and titles.
Now they are both together under the name of manuscript department.
Well, another department was the books department of course.
Another one was the engravings.
And the last one, the Mendels and Collins.
Is Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal being brought into the Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal?
Yes, I have not pronounced till now the name of Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal but of course actually last year our government has decided
to gather all of that, to bring all the collections of Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal into Richelieu.
So when we'll have place, when all the books and periodicals will be transferred, are transferred in Tolbiac, at that time, here, not only will gather all the performing arts collection, but
two will carry here the collections of Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal.
But that's causing some problems, some people are very unhappy about that, I understand that.
That's true, you're right, because they have a very very pleasant reading room, that's true.
The reading room with 48 seats, so it is
small reading room and the people find very well in this reading room and that this room smells ancient time, I don't know how to tell it.
The ambiance I guess of that particular building.
Otherwise the building was not built to be a library, we must know that.
It has been built to be flat apartments.
And so what people see today, where are the radio rooms?
Are the noble, is, excuse me, the noble flat.
That means all the salons, the nice rooms, rooms for receptions, if you want.
But when you see the upper stages, it is not exactly the same.
And it's not good for books.
And the important thing is you're trying to... No, we believe in taking care of the books.
of course and that's what we say and today if oh we don't know what can happen but if ever political decision changes we are convinced today that we'll have a lot of public works to do upon the building otherwise
It will be very dangerous for collections, but too for people.
In this building, you're keeping the manuscripts?
Here, yes.
The very old ones, the ancient ones?
Yes, the old and the recent ones.
But how about the conditions here for maintaining them?
the manuscripts wouldn't that wouldn't the newer building be better equipped to handle that certainly you're right of course because at the time we had not the same standards as we have today of course and some stages of the stores of course of the stacks are not so good for conservation but when
At the time, all the books and periodicals collection will be transferred to Tzolbiak.
At this time, we'll begin public works here too, in order to give more place to the actual departments.
Places for collections, but place for the staff, because many of them have no offices.
Yes, place for technical rooms where the, come on the magazine, it's not the keepers, but people who work upon collections.
Curators, curators.
But at the low level, if you want.
Custodians.
Yes, custodians can work and can prepare or repair the collections.
Yes, we need that.
And we need to more place for readers.
More seats at first, and secondly, place bigger than the actual places, because today, readers come with their machines, with their computers, when I say that.
Do you work at all, Madame Schillinger, with digitization, the scanning into computers of manuscripts and all?
We have started.
No.
If you want, it is not a general step to work like that.
But we have now a program of scamming.
And I have, besides me, but now he's on holidays, a curator who is in charge of the digitization here.
And so,
As in my direction, we have many different kinds of documents, different formats, by the dimensions, by... So you have to choose
different definitions for instance for the digitalizations and yes so he he works with our automation department direction it is a direction in order to make the good choice
and actually we have about 11 programs of digitization not all for manuscripts we have yes two programs for manuscripts and it is illuminated manuscripts yes illuminated manuscripts not yet the literary manuscripts we would like very much we know that it is more difficult and we must
think exactly what we want for that.
We have two programs of digitalization for engravings, for photos, for maps.
No, we haven't chosen music scores in the music department.
We have chosen iconography of musicians.
Do you expect that
at some point the scholars will be working from the digitized copies?
Or do you still expect to allow the scholar to use the original?
No.
Ah!
Yes.
Different cases, of course.
You cannot have just one approach.
It is impossible.
Among the criteria to choose the documents to scan,
What to have done?
We have several.
For instance, we can choose the documents the most consulted by readers, requested by readers.
We can choose them because they are getting brittle.
and documents which interest the public the most.
We have to do with these criteria, of course.
If the originals are coming brittle, of course, we give at first to readers the digitized form.
The copy.
And it is only if we receive a very hard researcher who needs to see really the original that we give to him
the original, otherwise never.
If he wants to see the color of the ink, for instance.
For instance, yes, or the paper, sometimes, and the water mark, of course.
Or if there are any annotations marks.
Yes, yes.
But if it's just content, if it's just... Then why does one have to... But already we do that with the photos, because the microphones, microfiche, of course, already.
Actually, in our manuscript department, many readers, when they come, if they ask documents already reproduced, will give them at first the microphones.
And if it is only if they have good reasons to see the originate, they will give the originate.
Otherwise, no.
Sometimes it is discussion, a hard discussion with them, you know.
Do you know Roger Stoddard at Harvard University?
Mr. Stoddard, who's the head of the Houghton Library, rare books.
Yes.
But he contends that there are some manuscripts that only have one use left, perhaps, that if you go through it once or twice, it will fall apart.
And he has things that he says, maybe we have to copy them, and then we'll have a copy, and that's the only one you'll ever use.
So then that happens, I guess.
How about acquisition?
That's true.
A policy of acquisitions, are you still acquiring material as aggressively as you have in the past?
Well.
Maybe you could just discuss the policy of the French Library on that.
Well, policy.
It depends, of course, if it is manuscript, unica, or if you speak of printed documents, of course, engraving, yes, like engraving.
You know that our library has the legal deposit since 1527.
Wow.
No.
1537.
Yes.
And of the king's Francois Ier.
He has decided.
And so we still have it.
And we have it for
for all the printed documents distributed to one public.
So books, periodicals, engravings, photos too, music scores, maps of course, and audiovisual documents.
That means phonograms, videograms, multimedia.
And since 1992, now, we have legal deposit for electronic documents when they are printed upon a disc.
Really?
Or Progiciel.
How do you see it?
No, Progiciel, it is commercial softwares.
Oh, yes.
Very interesting.
We have legal deposit for all these kinds of documents.
yes it is so we for today the development of the collection is based upon legal deposit when we have it for them and purchases gifts legacies of course exchanges too yes with foreign libraries or institutions not only libraries
Mr. Scheide in the United States did an exchange with Bibliotech National.
One book, he got the 1457-month Psalter.
You had a duplicate copy, so he did an exchange.
Yes, yes, because we get several copies from the legal deposit.
Yes.
Your focus, of course, is now the Library of Congress does every nation in the world.
It tries to.
No, we don't want to.
The British Library tries also to do outside of Great Britain.
No.
But you are primarily French.
Primarily.
And already it's the art we think.
We think.
Primarily, of course.
French.
After that I can say francophony for books, for instance, and periodicals.
Naturally.
And as all the
great research libraries we purchase to get them by exchange well we acquire let us say acquire we acquire two foreign documents in order to have what we call reference collections in for all kinds of documents so we acquire
foreign engravings, foreign photos, foreign maps coming from USA, from Japan, from Russia, from Denmark, I don't know, from all over the world.
Of course, in all French parts, in translation too.
Yes, but what we try is to get, of course, the best of the productions of a high level, research level, and that's one condition.
And a selection, of course,
in order to give an idea of the production in one country at the same time as in our country.
And for the past.
And it is a case, for instance, for our oriental division of the manuscript departments.
They have fabulous collections since the 16th century.
16th, 17th century, 17th century.
And very early, they got Arabic, Hebraic, Turkish, I don't know, Chinese, Japanese documents.
And it is known, they are well known all around the world.
So when today we have the occasion
to purchase, generally it is by purchase, to buy a document complementary of the collection, we do it.
But only in this case.
Do you still have an adequate budget for purchase of the new material?
I know we see it all over the world.
Everywhere you'll hear librarians telling you, no, it is not enough.
Well, I think we must be reasonably sometime.
We can say it's rather good budget.
Let us say rather good.
But it is impossible with such a budget, which is limited.
Yes.
For instance, I can give you an idea, if you want, for my direction.
So, for the seven departments I have in my direction, manuscripts, engravings, maps, music scores, performing arts, medals, coins, and arsenal, seven.
Well, I have seven millions by year.
Seven millions.
By year for the special collections.
That means that I have
another budget for buying books, for reference books, in order to be able to work upon these documents.
Well, although for really the special documents, I have about 7 million.
And we're saying francs, of course, francs, French francs.
Well, it is far not enough.
And last year, for instance, we had the occasions to buy very, very rare collections of contemporary manuscripts by René Chard, the French poet, and illuminated by very famous artists, painters, French painters.
And this money was not enough.
It was about 11 millions only.
what to do.
So when such an occasion happens, we have to ask for more money from our ministry.
And sometimes we have a good answer, but sometimes not.
What happened in this case?
It was a good one.
But it is not always the case.
And we see very often French documents
really patrimonial documents that we would like very much to keep here in the country, sold to the great countries, buying French documents across the United States or France, but we don't know after that if they stay in Switzerland.
And Japan.
Could you define
Patrimony for me, that is a word I see often.
Patrimony for us is a document very important for the history of the country.
That means document produced in the country, or relating to the story of the country.
For instance, documents relating to Ballets Russes,
all this period, a very famous period for ballots.
Well, you can't say really it is a French document.
No, but there are very straight relations with the history of the French ballot.
So, we consider it is a patrimonial document.
And recently, we barred like that and, comment on this, and prevent
outside the country of a music score of Stravinsky.
Because we consider that it was a patrimony document.
And it can be considered as a patrimony for its historical, artistic, literary, archaeological interest.
for all these reasons scientific too history for instance manuscripts of Pasteur of Marie Curie and we have them here that's why I give this example is this a legal document defining patrimony that is very interesting defining patrimony not exactly but we have a decree yes about the how to go
outside the country export export yes we have yes and it is at the origin no we had many years ago already a French law about that but now we have a new law inspired by the European legislation
And this new law has been taken at the end of 1992 and gives, if you want, but it's very short, some definition about these kinds of documents forbidden from exportation, of exportation.
Do you see this as a concern with all of the countries of Europe becoming like a united Europe?
No, no, no.
All of us, each of us, we have our culture and we have different patrimony.
And the richness of the different European countries is not the same by history.
Generally, the Mediterranean countries are richer than the northern countries of Europe.
Richer?
Is that the way you use it?
That means Italy, Spain, France.
And that is in difficulty because when we discuss about new legislation, we have not the same feeling and the same reaction because of that.
I see.
But would you also say then that with this united Europe, for want is a better phrase,
it is more important than ever for the National Library to preserve the patrimony.
Of course.
Yes, I think it is.
We have to do it.
And in the European legislation, if you want, try to fix the same regulations for the culture.
But they have written, too,
that they will do all they can do to protect the individual culture of each country.
Did you have a question?
It just means that there are many, many collections that we have now.
Do you have one?
No, not enough now.
You are right, actually, just at the point where we are not enough rooms.
And that's why we really were waiting for the departure of the books collection to Talbiage, because we need the space.
We need them very strongly.
Is there, of course, this is probably your area and other people I'll talk to tomorrow might be able to comment on this, but is there any discussion on, we were talking earlier about computerization and digitization, of deaccessioning certain books once they've been put onto computers?
In other words, getting rid of certain books once they have gone into a computer format?
I have not well understood your question.
Excuse me.
Let's say you computerize, digitize a book.
Yes.
You now have it on a computer.
Do you get rid of the physical object?
Do you keep the... Yes, we keep.
Yes.
Oh, yes, we keep.
We keep.
And till now, we keep it in the collections here in the library.
Because with Tolbiac...
at the same time has been built just a little outside from Paris another building just square buildings with stacks to keep one what we call one security collection which must be not given to readers only to be kept
storage, only storage.
Well, and in the case you are talking about, no, we don't want to put the book in this stack, not now.
We'll see.
Perhaps in 10, 20 years, it is too new, too recent.
We don't know exactly today how the readers will work with that.
We have to wait a little.
The French library is really doing very impressive things on the internet, from my home.
Yes, you've seen.
And the manuscripts?
No?
I haven't gone to the manuscript.
No, no, but open internet.
It's a very short program about the king, Charles V, not V.
You expect at some point to have all of that available on the internet access, the cataloging.
Yes, the two great databases of the library now are available open internet, yes.
Which is, do you see at some point, and this is just a question of your own feeling, do you see the printed book, the book remaining into the 21st century?
Yes, of course.
Do you see it being replaced?
I am sure that they will remain.
We need them, all of us.
You have not the same approach, the same kind of reading with a book.
With a book, you can go like that, you can do that, you can work up on several pages.
Yes, you can.
It is not the same manner.
It is a linear, very often, reading.
open the computer.
It is not the same with a book or several books.
I think you have a larger view when you have original.
It depends exactly what kind of research you do, what is your work.
Sometimes for your work you don't need to have a book.
or the manuscript or book and manuscript etc but sometimes really you need to have them and if you have just to see some pages of the book an article for instance well perhaps you can read it on computer when you have to read a whole book on computer
I don't know if you resist, but I can't.
I don't know anyone who has ever read a book on a computer.
No.
Well, computers have many qualities, and we have seen it with engravings, for instance, or illuminates.
Why?
Because you see perhaps better the image.
You can get it bigger and see better the details.
You can see only one detail in great size, etc.
Well, it's a new kind of lecture, of view.
It is interesting.
It's a tool for studying, for closer studying.
Yes, but you cannot see it only like that.
or the outside, the complete page or the complete presentation, because I think that really the work of a creator, it is not only the information, it is more that information.
Do you have an email address?
Do you use email?
Yes.
I'm going to give you my card.
Because I haven't it up on my card.
Here's my card here.
I'll leave with you.
I know you're busy.
I would like, if possible, to contact you again at some time, if you don't mind.
When I try to grab this tape and... Did you have any questions?
Could you give me an idea of the numbers of manuscripts?
Just give us an idea of the size of the collections you supervise.
I will give you more than that.
I tried to give you a collection.
Oh, excellent.
Do you know Mr. Carlton Lake?
No.
At the University of Texas.
No, last year I visited the Getty.
Oh.
And I went to the Huntington Library and I was very
I used to see them, and I saw some new libraries in San Francisco or Los Angeles.
So different.
Really?
So what do you think of the new libraries of today?
Well, I think, of course, it is a concept more, comment on the, comfortable for the readers, of course.
everything is, is much better organized around them.
As I told you, for instance, the size of the table to work, and all the reference books around the reading room.
You have computers, if you want, if you need, you can.
access to the databases many things like that and well architecture too and light from the daylight if you want is better assured well this one is an old I can't give it to you but I think I can give you this
collection.
So you'll find performing arts maps, engravings.
Our manuscript department is divided in two parts.
One occidental and the other oriental manuscript.
But it is the same department.
And this one is for coins and mills.
But I haven't yet the new one and it is my last
That's why I keep it for the music scores.
And I have not two, the one for Arsenal.
That's great.
And you'll find some numbers and the volumes of the collections, you'll find it.
So you will be staying here, you will not be moving to the new building?
No, no.
All the special collections will stay here and will share this building with the library of the Institut National for Histoire de l'Art, National Institute for History of Art.
It will be a new creation.
It is not yet created.
So they will have the library here in some part of this building.
Of course, will be the main... Tenant.
Tenant.
Thank you.
Tenant of the building.
But they will have a part.
Oui?
I think we've used enough of that.
Well, if you need some more information, something, I can give it to you.
Just you send me your questions.
Yes, merci.
And so you work... I'm writing a book.
Want me to write the name of my book on there?
Yes, I have in the... Oh, okay, yes.
In the letter, because Thierry Grier gave it to me.
We'll see him tomorrow, and we'll go over to Tobia tomorrow.
I'm going to go see Monsieur Beret's Filet Beret right now.
So interesting.
I hope for you that he will show you some very rare documents, too.
We're due there at four o'clock, so that's... You're going to give me your card, too.